Um, what, so let's get back to the Frank Neir case. Frank ne tested positive.
Was it.
Also, oralable also same thing, long term metabolite of oral ball.
Here's the difference? Frank Meir was the same as John Jones.
His first time through was sanctioned.
John didn't get off the first time that showed up in his system, he got,
you know, he was looking at potential four years, went to arbitration,
presented evidence,
enacted some other clauses in the policy that reduced his sanction.
What does that mean? Uh, well, one of them was, uh, um,
substantial assistance where he assisted ATA in some way,
shape or form. And he got a reduction for, for doing that's in what way?
So I don't know. And this is the exact reason why I do this.
So I insulate myself from that interaction between USADA and the
athlete. They are the sodidjudicator in this. They do not, you know,
get me on the phone, say, Hey, we're thinking about going this way.
They adjudicate completely in a vacuum and you are you're.
Just so people know your title is safety, health and.
Safety athlete, health and performance, vice president of athlete,
health and performance. Yeah.
So you no longer work.
For yada, I've never worked for USADA that that's a big misconception.
A lot of our fighters think that I've never worked for USADA.
I was a federal agent for 22 and a half years. Um, the latter part,
my career got involved with all these P E D distribution cases,
2015 lorenzofertitada and Dana white through a mutual, uh,
friend contacted me and said, Hey, would you come out and kind of talk to us,
we're contemplating maybe putting our own program together.
We've had some recent high profile positives. So I came out to Vegas, uh,
with them.
And a week later I get a phone call asking if I want to come work for 'em and
kind of implement this new program, but I've never been an employee of USADA.
Okay.
So that's,
that's good to know because that's been stated by some public figures that you
used to work for USADA, and now you work for the UFC, never worked for in.
Shell.
<Laugh> that's one of my favorite words you never worked for USADA,
you, uh,
brought youada to the UFC or communicated with USADA and facilitated
this agreement.
Correct? So I, I never worked for USADA. I did work very closely with USADA.
So USADA, when I first started these series of investigations back in 2002,
look, I knew all about how to work a heroin distribution organization,
a cocaine distribution organization methamphetamine,
but when it came to performance enhancing drugs,
there was no class that myself or really any other federal agent or,
or law enforcement agent goes through surrounding distribution of performance
enhancing drugs.
So I was examining the discarded garbage of bowel every week
when they put it out to the curb, began seeing notes, rappers,
all these substances. I had no idea what these things were.
I didn't know the difference between testosterone epitestosterone
erythropoietin, HCH. I knew nothing.
So what I did is I figured out who those experts were,
who were the people that could very quickly get me up to speed on what I was
looking at. Um,
Dr. Katlin who ran the UCLA Olympic lab was one of the first and he started,
um, you know, kind of walking me through this.
He put me in touch with USADA and, you know, they began educating me as well.
So, um, over the course of those investigations, um,
I got a lot from them in terms of educating on these substances.
They were bringing some of their cooperating witnesses to me,
and then we go off and running on criminal investigations. Um, but never,
never worked for them. So.
You saw to correct me if I'm wrong,
but the way they would work would be very compartmentalized.
Like they would not specifically communicate with you on all of the details of
this.
Correct. And they don't know. I mean, they don't thats,
so you don't the independence aspect. I don't,
as these deliberations are going on, what they're looking at. I don't know.
Cooperation mm-hmm <affirmative> just for me to be Frank would in,
in my eyes would mean that something was done purposely illegally,
and this person had some knowledge of purpose purposeful,
illegal activity,
and that they would somehow communicate this to facilitate some sort of,
uh, catching of someone involved in a criminal act or in an act of cheating.
Yeah. That.
That would make sense to me too. Yeah. So that would.
Be what we we're talking about.
Youada would allow John a shorter suspension if he actively
participated in helping them catch people that were cheating. That.
That's the understanding. I don't know that be implied. That would be implied.
I don't know to what level that was done.
I don't know if it was that or if it was, Hey,
here's how this drug in more general, here's a,
I don't know what it was I purposely, but would be.
That would mean that John would have to know about cheating.
If you were saying like this, this is how this ju drug works.
This is how I used it. I mean, this would, he would, that,
that would mean his initial defense would've to be thrown out the window because
it wasn't an accident.
Well, I, I mean, I don't know about that. If he knew something separate from,
you know, this, he wasn't someone else doing someone else. Yeah. And again,
I don't, I don't want anybody to reach that conclusion.
I have no idea what his substantial assistance entailed none. Right.
Um, and that's a slippery slope. It is a slippery slope.
And look transparencyencies important in any program, but you know,
only to a certain level, look, if you were transparent out what everyone's,
you know, cooperation or substantial assistant was,
and the whole world knew about it,
you're never gonna get anybody after that coming in and, and, and cooperating.
I saw this definitely on the criminal side with, you know, informants,
you don't,
that's not something that's that you want to be transparent about or disclose.
Right.
But there's gonna be a bunch of people that have a real issue with that.
The idea that John Jones, you know,
one of the greatest fires of all time is actually working as an informant.
I mean.
It's, it's listed in the, in the, you know, in the McLaren's ruling,
that that was one of the reasons for the,
the mitigating factor and the reduction. But I don't, again, Joe I'm,
since Neith you, I have any information.
Nothing about it. Just leave that alone, nothing about it.
It's been stated we know what it is. Okay. Or, or we know that it's a thing. Um,
when it comes to the John's initial test
where he was sanctioned and was, uh,
suspended for a determined period of time,
Frank Meer also was sanctioned.
And he was for a determined period of time as well. He was two years.
He was two years. John was shorter than that. John was shorter.
John cooperated didn a bunch of other deal. Two thingss, two things.
He, you not only cooperated, he went to arbitration and put on a defense.
He put on a defense that look,
the evidence here shows no intentional ingestion of fact,
McLaren gave him a further reduction based on,
there was no evidence that this was intentionally done.
Frank Meir didn't put on any. He had every right to go to arbitration,
put on his own offense. Mm-hmm <affirmative>, didn't.
Do that. What about Josh Barnett?
Uh, Josh Barnett, you know, a completely different set of facts.
His came from a contaminated supplement. It was, was a different substance.
He went to an arbitration, hearing the arbitrator ruled with Josh and said, yep.
You know, based on where we are now,
based on the care and effort that you took you're right. You deserve to,
to have time served at the time of that arbitration. So again,
I think that's a good example of the checks and balances in place here.
You've got me overseeing the program,
taking a look at how these things come out.
You've got the ability from the athlete to go to McLaren's group and
judge, you know, the set of facts. And in that case, McLaren's group said,
youatada, I think maybe you overreached a little bit here.
And I believe Josh and Josh is, you know, basically time served.
You know, you wanna see, you wanna see them get it perfect right. Every time.
But you know,
and the reality in the real world is that doesn't necessarily happen.
And that's why you have these checks and balances available.
Um, Josh Barnett's take on the matter is that they tried to paint him as guilty,
even though he was not. And that he,
he feels like he definitely got a bad deal and that he was labeled
as someone who was taking this substance,
he was suspended for a long period of time while he was going through this.
And although he was found not guilty,
that he feels like not enough emphasis was put into
establishing that he was not guilty and that, you know, he,
he feels like they chased him down over something that he didn't do.
Yeah. I mean, well,
well here's what he did do is he used a supplement that if he would've listened
to anything that we educate on, that youata sends out regular reminders,
our fighters are required on a quarterly basis to go through videos and their
whereabouts filing that deals with these issues.
If he would've followed any of that of vice,
when it came to his supplement choices,
he would've never chosen the supplement he used. I, you know, when,
when I heard about that supplement and what was on the label and how it was
marketed, I said, okay, well, that's,
that's likely the candidate of where it came from. Yeah. So I mean,
the analysis would be, Hey, you know, that pool, be careful.
There's sharks swimming in that pool. They can eat you.
And the person jumps in the water anyway, saying, look,
I didn't wanna get eaten by a shark, but a shark comes up and aid, em,
it's like, Hey, we told you that this was the case. You didn't follow that. Now,
there also needs to be a differentiation between someone who intentional
cheating, intentionally cheating and someone that's just, you know,
makes a naive supplement choice. There,
there needs to be a differentiation between that. And there was in that case,
Josh didn't get, you know, the full penalty of what was, what that substance,
you know, would've rendered. But he did have to go.
Through a long period of time where he was unable to fight.
He did, but you know, again, he had the prohibited substance in his body. Um,
youata has to look at, Hey, even though you did, didn't do that on purpose.
Did that give you a performance enhancing benefit?
Did it allow you to recover a little bit better?
Did it make you a little bit stronger? And you know,
that's why those strict liability provisions are in there. Other wise,
people would.
Just take these prohibited supplements and say, oh, I didn't know exactly.
Just it was an accident. Exactly. And meanwhile, they're getting a benefit from.
It. Exactly. So they have to have some sort of penalty in.
Place. I think so. Yeah. Now I also think, again, there needs to be, uh,
a differentiation between the intentional non-intentional and we do have that in
our policy.
There are definitely mitigat factors available in our policy that if you didn't
do thing on purpose, you're not, you know, you're not sanctionous high.
Tim means is a great example there. Yeah.
So Tim means used a relatively benign supplement.
It was a creattin creattin, you know,
generally doesn't have an issue as, as,
as opposed like testosterone booster supplements.
We tell our athletes stay away from the,
anything marketing as a testosterone booster.
It's one of the most common with contaminants or purposefully spiking purposeful
spikings Tim means uses a creattin. It had, uh,
oine in a very small amount. Uh, we founded in there, you know,
oine is a two year sanction. He got six months, um, you know,
so back, relatively quickly. So I think that Wass the same thing with.
Joel Romero.
So correct. Joell Romero used a natural diuretic product that had, um,
a arm in it. Um, in all these cases,
not only does the,
the prohibited substance need to show up in what the athlete has says,
they've used already to pro,
but to protect against making sure the athlete isn't purposely spiking,
it youata will go out on their own on the market independently procure,
hopefully the same lot of product. And in the case of Yoel and Tim,
they were able to do that, test it completely independently of the athlete,
determine what level, the prohibited substances in that,
based on the interview with the athlete of how,
how much did you use when's the last time you used it relative to this test,
do the science calculations just to make sure an athlete's not saying, well,
I know this creattin is spiked with oine,
so I'm gonna go use oine and then I have a built-in excuse when I test positive
for Aing in order to be able to match contamininate levels with what's being
excreted in the urine, you would literally have to have PhD chemistry degree,
and I'm not aware of, of any of our athletes having that. It' be very,
very difficult to do that. And so these.
Detection levels, again, we're talking about nanograms,
we're not talking about large quantities that.
Would, or P keikagrams keikagrams. Okay. Correct. Now.